# Chapter I
## Germany in the mid-19th Century

The little village of Volkertshausen lies only a few miles north of the Swiss border and a little southeast of the Black Forest.^1 Church
records show that Wiesers have resided there since at least 1640, although there are none living there now. Before that time, it is very
likely the family originated in Austria. Johann Wieser, the oldest of whom something is known, the clergy noted was very likely a
house painter. The Wiesers have never been identified as belonging to a class of “farmers.” There is no evidence any owned a farm,
large or small, outside of a few acres. Wendelin Wieser owned one such small plot at the edge of the village, referred to by the natives
as being the size of a handkerchief. Today, only one granddaughter of Wendelin’s sister still lives there. All Wiesers were Catholic.
The Catholic Church stood next to the Gasthaus zum Löwen, an inn purchased by Wendelin in 1909, and only a small vacant lot
separated the church from the house Wendelin owned at the time Joseph was born.

(^2)
**Coat of Arms for the town of Volkertshausen**
Volkertshausen lies to the north of Lake Constance^3 in a region called the Hegau, an area similar to that of the Texas Hill
Country. Most residents (64%) remain Roman Catholics today.^4 The county seat of the area to which Volkertshausen belongs is the
city of Constance, an ancient Roman city which is situated on the northwestern shores of Lake Constance. Volkertshausen was
chosen for settlement because of a cold-water spring that supplied a steady stream of fast-running, crystal clear spring water and
remained well-stocked with trout. Also, it supplied a sufficient volume of water to power a mill.
The area was conquered by the Romans, who invaded from the south and brought civilization, established settlements, and
built their Roman-style cities. Volkertshausen evolved from a few farmhouses beginning around 752 A. D. but was not incorporated
until 1250. It was assigned to the principality of Baden in 1826, and like most rural villages across Germany, it was affected by all the
wars, political intrigue, and plagues that swept the German states throughout the centuries, far too many to detail here. Perhaps
because of Volkertshausen’s small size, Joseph often simply said that he was from Constance. Although many of his after-dinner
stories took place in Volkertshausen, I cannot remember his specifically mentioning its name. Nevertheless, Volkertshausen was quite
typical of the dozens of villages scattered throughout the Hegau region.
In the late 1880’s the Hegau region was much more rural than it is today just as could be said about parts of America.
However, the experiences of those living in each were not the same. In this region of Germany, the life of an individual was still
partly concerned with obligations to the landlord or the church.^5 More than anything else, the social class of the village into which
anyone, including a Wieser, was born determined their status for their entire life.
Three distinct social classes still existed in the Hegau region between 1500 to 1800 that continued perhaps even to 1900.
Several, very likely, influenced the Wieser families. The first class consisted of wealthy farmers, approximately 2 - 5 % of the
population of the region. These possessed the big farms. However, smaller portions of these farms were owned outright, and larger
parts were obtained by fief from a landlord or the church or a monastery. Also, these farmers occupied the important village
positions, like village judge, mayor, or other local offices.^6
It is not known how much land certain Wiesers may have acquired throughout their lives, but it is doubtful that any Wieser
fell into this class. Of course, land ownership was an important measure of importance to those who had acquired it. It indicated a
status among one’s peers. Perhaps that is why owning land was of such importance to Joseph. To a lesser extent it interested Ernst,
Joseph’s younger brother, but he seemed unable to make the serious sacrifices throughout his life to acquire it.^
The common farmers or about 60 - 80 % of the population made up the second class. They possessed land also obtained by
fief. These farmers worked hard and usually were able to have a modest standard of living for themselves and their families.^7 Perhaps
some Wieser family members worked their way up into this class, but none of the immediate family tree hints of any.^8 Of course,
primogeniture^9 affected all families; as farms became smaller, laws pertaining to land ownership changed, and families were required
to give a farm to their oldest son without dividing the farm into smaller plots. Very often it was only land that was owned, for there
seldom was a large amount of cash to distribute. The rest of the children inherited nothing. Consequently, more and more children
were forced or driven by their own families to leave the farms on which they had been reared. Sadly, in most incidences, they knew
no other existence. Obviously, those siblings left without an opportunity to inherit land fell into a third category.
The third class consisted of the day laborers or about 20 - 40 % of the population. They worked for the other farmers for
day wages. They were very poor and usually had many children, many of whom often died at an early age. The more children they
had, the more field hands it gave the family, and the more the family might earn or harvest.^10 Even so, few farms increased
production. Work was just accomplished faster with more hands. With more mouths to feed, there was often less to go around.


Uncle Vincent’s and Wendelin’s grandfather, Jacob Christoph Wieser, fathered 9 children and belonged to this class. Jacob
Christoph, however, was eulogized upon his death in 1847 as having become a “citizen of the village and a day laborer of good
repute,”^11 a high complement in a time when most day laborers were viewed as little more than vagabonds and thieves. The status as
“citizen” also conferred specific rights and privileges and usually was an indication of economic status.^12
Two of those nine children were Francisus Antonius and Benedikt. Francisus Antonius was the father of Vincent, and
Benedikt was Wendelin’s father. Francisus was the oldest surviving son of Jacob and had the rights to the land owned by Jacob
through inheritance. Hence, he had the resources for funding the immigration for his entire family in 1851 and took that opportunity.
Benedikt was the youngest and was born 17 years after Francisus, his brother. He remained in Volkertshausen despite inheriting
nothing. Nevertheless, the Wiesers very likely were among these “day laborers,” and it may have been the reason that Francisus
Antonius moved his family to the United States. It does not appear that Wendelin’s father enjoyed the same success as his father and
more than likely sank into still another class.
The majority of farmers in the Hegau region developed or took on a sideline, a profession that was usually handed down
from father to son. The highest class of these, an occupation that brought in the most money, was that of an innkeeper. The next
was that of being a blacksmith, a cartwright, a cooper, a tailor, or a shoemaker, etc. The lowest class was that of being a weaver, a
rope maker, or a tanner. Wendelin, Benedict’s son, purchased the Gasthaus zum Löwen sometime around 1909, shortly before his
first cousin Vincent, the son of Francisus Antonius, his uncle, returned home on a final pilgrimage to visit the village of his birth.
Supposedly Wendelin may have thought that he was buying himself into a higher class among the town’s people when he purchased
the inn, but it is doubtful that he earned the social status that had been so respected among innkeepers up to that time.
There was one other profession, which is always considered separately, that of the millers. Generally, they were wealthy,
often very rich, but usually they had a very bad image. It was said that they were not always honest. For example, they were often
accused of mixing flour with sand or gypsum.^13 Moreover, they were considered to be highly immoral. The last statement is based on
the fact that the mills were normally and naturally located outside the villages and towns throughout the Hegau region. It was at the
miller’s location that events took place which the village could not tolerate within its own walls (prostitution, gambling, and excessive
drinking/partying).^14
Finally, there was the class that came to be known as “Bauer.” The German word "Bauer" not only denoted the profession
of a farmer but was also used as a title. A "Bauer" had to have at least two horses and/or bulls and one plow. A wealthy first class
Bauer had six or more horses and a net worth of more than 1000 Florin.^15 On the other hand, a third class, "Tagelöhner" or day
laborers, possessed not much more than a cottage, a vegetable garden, possibly, a goat, or some chickens.
Before 1820 marriages in the Hegau were allowed only with the permission of the landlord. First, the engaged couple had to
pay the lord to grant his permission. Secondly, the couple had to prove to him and to the community that they would be able to
support themselves and their children without any outside help. A minimum net worth of 100 - 200 Florins were required for
marriage. Since many engaged couples could not come up with this sum of money, a large number of the people in the Hegau region
simply remained unmarried.^16 Consequently, many illegitimate births were a frequent occurrence.
It appears the Wiesers were not any better at abstinence than others. The parents of illegitimate children had often been
punished heavily. Both could be subjected to a painful interrogation by the village judges and fined; the maximum allowable fine was
approximately 12 Florin. A bad fate throughout the Hegau was to be exposed publicly, especially on a Sunday in front of the church,
the woman with a straw garland on her head and the man with a straw sword at his side.^ Because of these embarrassing traditions,
many chose to immigrate to America, especially after 1800, usually by not always asking the landlord for permission because he would
require some additional remuneration or at a minimum, dozens of Gulders.^17 That may also explain the absence of any comments
following so many names of children found in the Stambuch^18 at Volkertshausen. The Volkertshausen Stambuch is full of
inscriptions such as _“nach Amerika ausgewandered,”_^19 following the formal entry made at their birth. However, restrictions and customs
began to relax even in the Hegau, as Germany, after decades of unrest, finally was hammered into a nation by Bismarck. The strict
adherences to centuries of unquestioned tradition began to fade away.
As the twentieth century was completing its first decade, much of the traditions so ingrained throughout the Hegau were
rapidly disappearing. Also, there were fewer Germans immigrating or leaving Germany. This was a new century, and Germany stood
as the number one leading industrial might in the world. There were jobs and opportunity everywhere. Joseph had his certification
and could find employment anywhere he wanted despite being the oldest and likely to inherit whatever Wendelin might have left
upon his death. He was not tied to Volkertshausen. His future appeared bright, and he had decided that he would not allow himself
to become entangled in situations or with people as his mother had found herself.
But, Volkertshausen, like thousands of small villages across Germany, remained centered around farming; centuries of
primogeniture had divided and subdivided the surrounding lands to a point that most farmers had only a few acres here, perhaps a
few more there, and all clustered around a central village where most inhabitants worked in farm-related endeavors. Many found
ways to break generational family bonds to escape to the cities, though not necessarily to America. In the preceding century, millions
had been forced to flee the country itself, but now times were better. In all probability most village children were required or
expected to continue some connection to agriculture, but by 1900, things in a traditional-stridden Germany were changing, and the
little village of Volkertshausen, while it lay deep in the southern most region of the German Reich, did not escape being part of the
new national pride that had been building since its unification in 1870.
Since 1870 Germany had enjoyed the title of being the most progressive industrialized nation in Europe. Her agriculture
and industry outperformed all other European nations. She stood at the cutting edge in new discoveries in industry and in chemistry.
Such national success was not entirely unnoticed among younger generations from rural villages and certainly not unnoticed by
Joseph. A future for bright, ambitious, German youths, even if born in small, remote villages, now lay open to those who might wish
to leave their villages and either enter the universities or the job markets increasingly becoming available in the larger towns and cities.


If the situation among the numerous German states had not been economically depressed during the first half of the 1800s,
few Germans might have chosen to immigrate to America, and Fredericksburg, along with hundreds of other towns across America
and most likely throughout the world, might not have been founded or inherited the German influences that made them what they
are today. Millions fled because of severe economic unrest, but despite all the upheaval among the numerous German states, things
were changing and that is very often overlooked by historians: changing because of a great unifying determination dedicated toward
building a new Germany.
During 1851 and about the time Vincent and his family were immigrating to America, Britain hosted a Great Exhibition
attended by representatives from the 18 states of the German Confederation who marveled at the technology on display by Great
Britain, with envy no less, at the range and quality of manufactured goods from the “workshop of the world.” Certainly, Great
Britain and France were industrial giants and leaders at this time and had become masters of the industrial revolution. Yet by 1900,
the united German State, the new German Reich, then just 30 years old, had taken that economic mantle from Britannia. Between
unification in 1871 and the outbreak of the First World War, the German Reich had not only caught up with Britain's economic
growth rates but had actually surpassed them. This economic progress was enhancing the prestige of Germany as much as she was
creating the finest armed forces in Europe.^20
An extended and remarkable study on the historical role played by internal migrations in Germany during the period of
industrialization between 1870 and 1913 emphasized that migration was one of the most important aspects of the economic and
political development of the new German Reich. Germany was undergoing a tremendous growth; the influx of a new labor force
from the countryside to urban areas fueled the ongoing processes of industrialization.^21 This was evident by the simple fact that
Joseph, armed with an education and after being rebuffed by his father, chose to leave his small village and find employment in a
different city and in a different field from that of his father. Nevertheless, massive population movements and rapid rates of
industrialization were leading to less social and economic tensions in Germany than were expected and/or actually hoped for among
some non-German historians.^22 There is simply no doubt that Germany, in 1900, stood at the pinnacle as the world leader in
chemistry, industry, and agriculture.^23 Joseph had every reason to be proud to have received such a book showcasing the prestige of
German ingenuity in agriculture. However, agriculture was not for him and remaining in Volkertshausen after his father spurned his
attempt at forming a partnership was now even less desirable.
Some historians have studied the far-reaching implications of the internal weaknesses of Germany and concluded that there
were so many internal socio-political conflicts and the society was so deeply divided that a solution to these problems could only be
found by pursuing an aggressive foreign policy that would lead to a great war. Actually, German society had already gone through
the most traumatic phases of industrial development prior to 1914.^24 Millions of Germans had immigrated and flooded the shores of
America, and hundreds of thousands continued to do so after the turn of the twentieth century, but industrialization of Germany was
almost complete, and the labor surplus was rapidly coming to an end. Also, at this time, salaries had increased for many workers.^25
Life in Germany had been getting better by each successive decade in the second half of the 19th century, and the war so strongly
predicted did not happen.
For the most part, emigrants to the new world came from the middle and lower classes in the Hegau just as in other regions
of Germany. Often a family group amassed money in order for one of their sons to emigrate. They hoped that he would earn
enough money in the new world to later pay for his crossing. In many cases, this occurred. Upper classes often emigrated when a
farm had been willed to one particular son; by law it went to the oldest. Often that heir would give his brothers some money to find
a new existence outside the village. Vincent’s father may have sold the farm and simply left his brothers to fend for themselves.
Many who found themselves forced off farms fled to the nearby towns and cities. Another social group for emigration consisted of
those persons who were a permanent burden to the community: e.g., extremely poor families, unmarried or widowed women with
children, violent persons, and prisoners. In some cases, the community paid partly or fully for the crossing. It saved villages the
larger expense of supporting them in the poorhouses.^26 No such collections were taken to suggest that Wendelin leave, however. He
was their cross to bear as he chose to bring his new wife to town and assign her much of the farm work and chores at home while he
changed little at all.
In the mid-1800s, the fee for a Bremen-New York crossing was 80 Mark (equiv. 60 fl).^27 This meant that Francisus Antonius
Wieser had to come up with a considerable amount of money to take his entire family. Joseph, as we shall see, had his passage paid
by his cousin Vincent. This was a perfect example of one generation helping another. The 20th Century, it appears, had already
changed many traditional ways of doing things in the Hegau.
It is difficult to visit the Hegau region today, seeing all its beauty and attractions, to try to understand that there could have
been a time, not really very long ago, when this was an area under the control of men and institutions that made it quite unattractive
to remain and void of much hope for change. For those not so fortunate to have had the proper standing, there was little to make
remaining there a pleasant experience. The Hegau and all of Germany was a region to flee even if it meant that one might never
again see a mother or father, a sister or a brother again.
A few more miles to the west southwest of Volkertshausen is an even smaller village known as Emmingen am Eck. Nearby,
adjacent to a small country road and directly adjacent to the Buhlhof^28 stand five wooden crosses that overlook the gently rolling
valley. They remain one of the most noted and photographed sites in the Hegau. These crosses were placed there during one of the
great pestilences that swept the area when the Bubonic Plaque or Black Death^29 was striking fears in the hearts of all cities and villages
across Europe. They have been replaced many times to keep the memory of that alive in the hearts of those now living there. The
real source of the disease, of course, was unknown for centuries. Peasants, village people, and their leaders all flocked to the church
for salvation and to be spared from the worst kind of death known at that time. These crosses represented victims of the plaque who
died near this village. No one was safe from the plague, not even in such remote country.


The Buhlhof was first occupied by Buhls in the late 1700s as they migrated to the Volkertshausen area from an area around
Leinstettin, a village deep in the state of Württemberg. They had enough money to buy a fairly large piece of land. Also, it meant that
they enjoyed a somewhat higher standard of living and a superior position in the Hegau region than what most Wiesers enjoyed
before the 1800s.
A progression of primogeniture sent dozens of Buhls into area villages and even to America and Canada seeking a better life.
Many became merchants, some of whose descendents still operate area businesses in the nearby villages. Others settled in larger
towns, such as Tuttlingen or Constance, where they either set up businesses or worked as servants. These were the children who had
the misfortune to have been the second-born males and, of course, all females regardless of their birth order who had not been
fortunate to marry someone inheriting a farm. Because of the high death rate among children, siblings often played a waiting game to
see if the oldest male survived their father to adulthood. The Buhls were not necessarily the most refined family in the area. They
were people of the soil, honest and hard-working. Life on any farm in the Hegau was difficult, and they had to be hard workers, for it
was a matter of survival. Many were quite ordinary, with ruddy complexions, faces wrinkled and weathered from harsh conditions,
large, calloused hands, large noses, deeply set eyes, and a head of dark, dense, jet-black hair. No male Buhls were bald. Members and
relatives in the Buhl family can easily be identified through these features. Work aged them faster than their years. Like the other
families in this region, the Buhls were Catholic.

```
30
Five Pestilence Crosses at Buhlhof
```
The Buhlhof encompassed about 75 Hectors,^31 consisting of finely tilled farmland, rolling hills, interspersed with thick clumps
of wooded areas. This was not necessarily considered a large farm, but to this day, it has everything that is necessary to sustain a
family throughout the year. It had done so in time of famine, pestilence, and wars and the Buhls had survived all. However, an extra
mouth to feed, perhaps two, could inflict suffering upon them all, even though an extra pair of hands might have shortened the hours
it took to do the work. Leisure hours were not a goal. The Buhls grew all their vegetables, grain, kohlrabi, turnips, radish, cabbage,
potatoes, and wheat. They wasted no days of their growing season, for summers were short and they had to make every hour count
to prepare for the harsh winters that followed. They had their own cows, which supplied them with milk, butter, and cheeses. They
raised enough hogs to supply them with cured ham and bacon. They also had enough horses for draft use and special hacks and
even a sled for use during heavy winter snows.
Their small orchard provided pears, cherries, and apples for canning, cider, and, of course, sauerkraut. They gathered grapes
for making wine. Perhaps in winter they were lucky to shoot a deer or trap a rabbit for meat. Sausage making was always a huge
affair, for it supplied meats during long winters. Such was the typical sequence of farm life throughout the Hegau. They even made
some of their own furniture and repaired broken wheels and farm equipment as needed. The area woods provided fuel and lumber
for additions to the farm’s buildings. Their home was a composite of additions haphazardly added as needed. The Buhlhof is not an
example of a stately mansion, but a collection of odd-sized farmhouses, barns, stalls, and tractor sheds, far more practical as many
ideally would imagine.


The Buhlhof provided, however, all the necessities of life and did create a fairly good life for those children born in the right
order and of the right sex. But for those born females or all the children thereafter, life would depend on marriage and perhaps the
generosity of an older brother. Those siblings were relegated to the area villages, towns, or cities to seek opportunities, if any could
be found. They were on their own. There is no evidence that any of the oldest males inheriting the Buhlhof gave money or aid to his
brothers or sisters. That is just the way life was throughout the Hegau region. Those who left often simply vanished from the pages
of the family records as well as those kept by the village priests.

```
32
The Buhlhof ca 1950
```
It was here that Maria Buhl was born on 4 August, 1861. For the next 27 years of her life, life on the Buhlhof was all she
ever knew. Even as a female, she was expected to help and work on the farm. Girls aged quickly doing farm work and often looked
years beyond their true age. If girls were lucky, they married early, hopefully to an oldest son expected to inherit his father’s farm.
Second sons, likewise, hoped to marry a daughter of a farmer who may not have any sons. Those second sons who remained
unmarried were not subject to scorn often heaped upon unmarried girls. It was as if there was an unwritten code that prevailed and
showered shame on girls who were unable to be married at an early age. Maria had faced that scorn for over a decade or more. By
1888 her situation had become almost hopeless, and her brothers were ruthless in letting it be known that they wished to have her off
the farm.
Primogeniture throughout Germany in the late 1880s still dictated that farms had to be inherited by the oldest male. It may
be one reason that Wendelin had such small acreage near the outskirts of Volkertshausen. It was an unfair law, but many saw the
need for it. Apparently the system was followed religiously and very likely without much debate. Popular opinion had no place in the
new Germany. It was not debatable. It was the law. It was what thoughtful rulers had decreed. What women thought about it did
not matter, for there were no women’s rights. They should marry and leave the farm at their first opportunity. The sooner they left,
the better it was for all.
Maria, however, had been overlooked by all the area bachelors. One by one her sisters found husbands and left the farm;
most brothers had also left. After her father died, matters grew more difficult for her as her oldest brother took ownership of the
Buhlhof. It was incomprehensible to her brothers to look upon Maria as an employee who was contributing to the success of
running the farm. Not being wanted, not even as a farm hand must have hurt Maria. Marriage was everything, albeit it meant still
working hard and rearing children on some other farm. However, once married and settled on another farm, such hard work would
have been the source of much happiness. Love had little to do with marriage. It was always about survival.
While it appears to us today to be a cruel way of looking at one’s siblings, it was not considered unusual at this time or
thought to be selfish, for Maria had had enough time to be selected as a wife. Her presence became an irritation to a point that her
brothers felt drastic measures were at hand. That she was a sister simply did not matter. She might as well have been a stranger.
After years of offering her to area men, Maria’s brothers resorted to casting a wider net. They sought the services of a “matchmaker.”
This was not an uncommon measure at this time. What proved to become truly bizarre was that the same matchmaker had also been
hired by Wendelin, an eligible bachelor from a neighboring village. The matchmaker would be able to collect his fees from both
parties if he were successful.
Wendelin’s reputation had deteriorated to such an extent that no respectful father in Volkertshausen would permit their
daughters to marry him. Nearing the age of 30, he began to think of settling down. Doted on and spoiled by three sisters, Wendelin
was finally actively looking for a wife. He had inherited his small farm and status in his village at the age of 18 and had played the field
now for more than a decade. Nothing could have been easier for a matchmaker. What young girl could resist such a stable man with
a house, a business, and a small farm? Well, besides those who knew of him might think again.


Maria was a farm girl and, as all such girls, largely uneducated, for females were not given much education beyond simple
instructions in reading and writing. Why should they? That kind of progress was no farther advanced in the New Germany than in
rural America. How Maria and Wendelin courted and what they thought of one another when brought together by the matchmaker
can only be surmised. They obviously began to see one another, and their courtship obviously led quickly to pre-nuptial sex, for
Joseph was born not five months after their marriage. Actually, that first meeting that found Maria innocently alone on the Buhlhof
may have been planned or arranged by her brothers and the matchmaker.^33 Perhaps that was not so unusual in the Hegau, and the
matchmaker may have suggested that to insure his commission.
Maria may not have consented to marriage willingly, but she was pregnant at 28 and still living on her brother’s farm.
Certainly, she was humiliated for the shame that she had brought upon herself and her family. Wendelin behaved badly upon learning
of Maria’s pregnancy, for he appeared to be in no hurry to marry the girl he had placed in a family way. For some time it appeared he
would not take her for his wife. He may have been having second thoughts about settling down. He very likely kept Maria and her
brothers guessing if he were going to marry her. What was the matchmaker’s responsibility? Maria may have been just too common
for him. What would people in Volkertshausen think of his marrying such an ordinary farm girl? Worse yet, what would his sisters
say? At some point he obviously decided that Maria was at least suitable to do the work on his little acreage. If he or Maria was
publically humiliated, as may have still been the custom at this time throughout the Hegau, we have no way of knowing, but gossip in
Volkertshausen was certainly as universal as it was in Fredericksburg, which was still a small Texas Hill Country town.
Now, was Maria the type of girl that one brought home to Mother? Would his sisters approve? Wendelin was, after all, a
descendent of a line that was engaged in businesses other than agriculture and in agriculture only marginally. The Wiesers had never
operated large farms or even small ones. At best they had experienced only a marginal existence in Volkertshausen since the mid-
1600s. So, did it really matter whom he took for a wife? Many villagers no less came to respect Maria in time and perhaps even took
pity on her for what she had to put up with. Then again, villagers in Volkertshausen had come to expect such conduct by Wendelin
and may not have been surprised. Maria, very likely in time, won praise and admiration for her suffering.
The match would prove to be one that was not made in heaven, and what Maria saw in Wendelin is simply not known.
Wendelin was still her ticket to get off the farm. First, she had been humiliated in not marrying earlier; now she was thoroughly
humiliated for being pregnant. Nor do we know what Wendelin saw in this common, obviously quite ordinary, rural farm girl save
for the fact that he probably was smart enough to know that no woman within gossip range of Volkertshausen would have him.
Certainly, he was considered “well off” by village standards. He was also spoiled, being a man of some means. He owned some land,
a cow or two, most likely a horse or two, carriages, a variety of business of sorts, and a house with acreage in Volkertshausen, all the
qualifications of an upper class in the Hegau. He also liked women and had obviously enjoyed his share, but they took his money and
his gifts though none may have accepted his proposals. These, after all, may not have been the marrying kind of women. His mother
must have been disappointed. Would he find a suitable wife, one whom she could at least have some pleasure knowing in the last
two years of her life? Perhaps there were no women good enough for her darling son!
Wendelin’s main occupation was that of selling wine. As a sideline, he also had been given whatever franchise rights may
have existed at that time, including the rights to sell farm machinery and such new labor saving devices for the home that included
sewing and washing machines. Wendelin also dabbled in coffee, tobacco, and of course, cigars (Schweizstumpen)^34 , plus those early
bicycles, the ones with the large front wheels. (It was on one of those that Joseph learned to ride a bicycle.)
Moving to the small village of Volkertshausen must have been a mixed blessing to Maria. There was a wedding and from
her brothers on the Buhlhof, she even received a simple, but magnificent bedroom set made from cherry trees sawed from timber
grown on the Buhlhof. Her brothers had made it for her. The set included a handmade standing clothes closet, a dresser, and two
very short single beds.^35 Perhaps her brothers were not all that lacking in their feelings for her. Volkertshausen was not far away. If
Maria wanted to visit her family, she was close enough to do so, albeit it would take some time to get there by horse and carriage, or
as so many did still in the last decades of the 19th century, simply by walking. Transportation by rail was becoming more and more
available in the larger cities, but Volkertshausen remained outside the expanding lines. The work on her new husband’s farm, a much
smaller piece of land, could not have been much different from what she was used to doing on the Buhlhof. Maria was quite efficient
and knowledgeable about doing such work. The one big difference was that Wendelin’s farm was not self-sufficient. It could not
produce all that they required. Consequently, shopping for basic necessities at the village market in Volkertshausen must have been a
new experience for Maria. Unlike life on the Buhlhof, she now had a little money to buy things she and her new husband needed.
Maria at last had a home of her own, and she was free from the toil the Buhlhof required. It was a new way of living. Much
of the pressure of growing sufficient food, and the constant struggle of putting enough away for long, cold winters, was over to an
extent. She may have felt awkward being the mistress of the household, but it is doubtful that she ever looked upon Wendelin’s farm,
his house, or his property as hers. She oversaw the few hectors of land that Wendelin owned, along with a few cows for milk, butter,
and cream, a hog or two for bacon, a few chickens for a steady supply of eggs, a few fields for grain, and a garden. That was all that
consisted of Wendelin's farm. Nothing from Wendelin’s farm went to market. She cooked, washed, mended, and did the things that
all new brides do. Also, she prepared for her first child. Her life now changed drastically. Few women were totally in a partnership
with their husbands. Even fewer were soul mates. Her job now was to rear his children, cook, and tend to her rescuer. In
Volkertshausen, Wendelin ruled his little fiefdom with a stern hand, unashamedly the master of a domain, albeit a very small one.
The marriage of Maria Buhl and Wendelin Wieser produced five children, three of whom survived to adulthood. Their first
child was named Joseph Benedikt: Benedikt, after Wendelin’s father. Joseph was born on 14 November 1888, followed a few years
later by another male who was christened Johann Alfred. As so many children born at that time throughout the Hegau, Alfred lived
only for a month, the cause of his death unknown. The loss of a child is always terrible, and his death fell squarely on Maria’s
shoulders. Except for the marriage, one might consider this the beginning of her life of sorrows. Their third child was a girl, but she


was born more than four years later. She was named Sofie and for the first time, Joseph had a sibling with whom he could play.
Joseph was 6 years old when Sofie was born. Perhaps Wendelin was disappointed that Marie had not given him another boy.
Sofie, like Johann, appeared to be sickly, and only through Maria’s constant mothering was Sofie able to survive. Wendelin
apparently had no sympathy for sick children, for compassion seemed not to be his strong suit. Wendelin had not been the kind of
husband that willingly assisted his wife with her chores. Even a minor task asked of him resulted in disaster that many family
members believed happened out of pure spitefulness. Many years later, Anna, Wendelin’s oldest surviving daughter, would relate the
true story of what she believed to have happened.
Marie worked literally around the clock to care for Sofie. Now, aged 5, she had developed difficulty in breathing, perhaps a
cold of sorts, and required a room high in humidity to aid her breathing. Maria set a kettle on the stove for the purpose of boiling
water to make steam and kept it going throughout the day. Late one afternoon, she had to do her field work. She would be gone for
a while, so she asked Wendelin to keep the kettle filled with water and to look after Sofie. Wendelin simply ignored Maria’s request.
The kettle boiled dry; the steam vanished. Sofia began to gasp for air, but her efforts went either unnoticed or were deliberately
ignored by Wendelin as he sat nearby, apparently with great indifference to her gasping for air. Sofia’s struggle ended when she grew
too weak to expel fluids from her lungs. The room grew eerily quiet for the balance of Maria’s absence that afternoon. Sofie was not
sleeping! Sofie’s lifeless body was found when her mother returned from the fields. The grief felt and endured by Maria would for
any normal person have been unbearable. She was convinced that Wendelin had deliberately allowed it to happen.^36 Still, she
remained by his side as they buried their second child. What could she do? Maria was trapped. She could not leave him nor return
to a Buhlhof whose current occupant had worked so hard to get her off the farm. Such was the role of women even as Germany was
entering a new age.
Joseph was again an only child. Sofie’s existence was never acknowledged by him. In the summer of 1897, a fourth child
was born. Another girl, she was named Anna Maria. Joseph turned 9 that year. Once again he would have a sister, but in three years
he was off to school in another village, too far distant to commute daily. He began a routine that kept him away from home for
much of the week, if not weeks. His new sister never became a real playmate. Joseph, of course, was home frequently, but Anna
would not come to fear Joseph. Nor was there the bonding that was normally associated among siblings. She would remain the little
sister; he, the older brother, and the darling of his mother.
Three years later, a fifth child was born. He was named Ernst Gottfried. By that time, at 12, Joseph had gained a certain
amount of respect among the other boys in his village. A new younger brother may not have been welcomed. He didn’t need a little
brother to tag after him. Of course, by this time, he was around even less. He was already away at school. Ernst knew only an older
brother who was home sporadically. Joseph did not come home to play with Ernst. So, as Ernst grew older, it was with Anna that
Ernst bonded. To her he would forever be the little brother who needed care. Home on some weekends, Joseph looked upon his
little brother as not measuring up to his standards. They were a playful bunch of rascals who loved to play pranks on many village
nerds. Perhaps Ernst was coddled too much by their mother and his sister. Joseph quickly grew to look upon Ernst as being a
weakling, maybe even a sissy. Joseph would tease him unmercifully. Ernst quickly learned to resent Joseph’s bullying. There was little
chance for developing a relationship between them.
Wendelin would be even less of a father to his children than most men. Of course, at that time, the role of males as heads
of the family may not have been one of compassion. There was simply no room for that in the Hegau or anywhere else in Germany.
Joseph, in many ways, may have been taking after his father in his relationship with his younger brother. Only the tough deserve to
survive. The manner in which Joseph treated his little brother may have been very much the way his father treated him. Joseph’s
relationship with his father took a turn for the worse at a very early age, but actually when is not known. It is clear, however, that
Joseph at some point learned to despise him, and from that point on, there was nothing but hostility between them.
Joseph often told after-dinner tales of his boyhood in Germany. Very often they ended with some moral theme or a lesson
on endurance and the perseverance necessary to succeed in life. Among those he told of spending a night among the abandoned
ruins of a nearby castle and suffering through a wet and violent thunderstorm in order to test his courage and to overcome his fears
of the darkness. The result of that was that he said he was never afraid again of anything. As all boys, he loved to play pranks often
on individuals who caught the attention of young boys through their actions and knowing that, their reactions gave Joseph and his
friends much amusement. When caught, as he always was, he received his share of whippings.
Joseph seemed to have a talent for angering his father as he grew and so was often in trouble. Perhaps this was normal in
the beginning as far as the relationship between sons and fathers go, but the relationship between Joseph and his father was far from
ordinary and would develop into an irreversible conflict for which there was no solution. He suffered many whippings and more
Ohrfeige^37 than normal. The whippings developed into beatings, and the gap between father and son became so great that time could
not heal the rift between them. Both were stubborn and perhaps Wendelin simply did not care. Perhaps Joseph was driven to
defend his mother and that infuriated Wendelin. One thing for certain was that Joseph never forgave those who trespassed on him
nor forgot what they did. The real reasons why he never developed a good rapport with his father will never be known. Nor can it be
said exactly when their relationship developed into an outright hatred. As in all conflicts between parents and children, it may have
started innocently enough.
Even as a boy Joseph loved to read. He would not allow anything to interfere with his reading, including his assigned chores.
Once, while washing down his father’s cow, he was caught reading a book with one hand while scrubbing the cow with the other. It
angered his father time after time to catch him reading instead of tending to his tasks. Reading was an escape. It took him away to
places that seemed inaccessible for many. It opened a world to him that lay beyond the Hegau, beyond Germany itself. He read not
only for pleasure but also to learn. He chose to master Spanish and Italian, and even French. He applied his mind to his texts. He
collected many books on literature and purchased a beautiful atlas, the pages of which took him away to lands that he thought he


would never see. Books were also his key to improving his mind. He loved school and wanted to continue his schooling to learn as
much as he could, for he believed that what he learned could never be taken away from him.
At about the age of 12, about the time that Joseph wanted to be sent off to school in Radolfzell am Bodensee,^38 an incident
happened that may have guaranteed him his education and ended his father’s objection to additional schooling. Whatever had
prompted Wendelin to administer another beating, Joseph was just as determined not to make it easy for his father to catch him. He
ran. His father, equally determined to administer a thrashing, did not give up as easily. Joseph ran into the barn and flew up the steps
of the ancient ladder to the second floor where the hay was stored. His father followed, surprising even himself! Cornered without
an escape, Joseph decided to jump from the upper loft of the barn to escape Wendelin’s certain wrath and another whipping.
The jump was not without consequences from that height. He had chosen to risk injury to himself rather than be caught.
As he hit the stony ground below, his body crumpled, and his arm and hand hit hard beneath the full weight of his body. Fortunately,
he had not broken his arm, but his hand was seriously cut and hurt. The fall tore two tendons to his fingers and severed their nerves.
There was no doctor in the village to perform surgery. His fall resulted in the permanent loss of feeling and use of two fingers of his
left hand. Wendelin stared in disbelieve from the loft at the body of his crumpled son lying below. He had already been accused of
causing the death of one child. Could he tolerate the accusations that were certain if he stood accused of a second? He realized that
he had pushed Joseph too far. From that day on, Wendelin lost what little control he thought he could administer over him. Maria,
too, may have given Wendelin a verbal thrashing. Joseph had discovered the limits to which Wendelin would go. Joseph now knew
he could do as he pleased. He demanded to continue his education.
Wendelin simply hated the fact that his children might become smarter than he. It was remarkable that he now consented
to allowing Joseph to attend school in Radolfzell am Rhein until he had finished his _Gymnasium_.^39 Radolfzell was too far away to
permit travel each day. Consequently, Joseph was boarded with a family there. Joseph was named the outstanding scholar upon
completion of his education at the age of 17 in 1906. He was recognized as the outstanding student of the area that encompassed
Stockach^40 and was presented a book on German Agriculture after six years of study. Most fathers would have been proud. His son
had won the highest recognition in this entire area of the Hegau. Wendelin resented it! For years he had railed against any child of
his becoming smarter than he. He had thought nothing of coming into Joseph’s room and throwing all his books from his shelves.
Wendelin despised Joseph for studying, for learning languages, for simply wanting to know everything. He had terrorized Joseph for
years and beat him unmercifully. It may have been the reason that Joseph one day vowed to educate his own children and encourage
them to be all that they could be.

```
41
Inside page and inscription of book
presentation made to Josef Wieser
```

That Wendelin did not want his children, especially Joseph, to be better educated than he, was one thing, but his problems
were not only with Joseph. His daughter, Anna, wanted nothing more than to become a teacher, but Wendelin simply had no desire
to see any of his children educated. Losing his temper on one occasion, he swore that no child of his would ever become smarter
than he. _“Kein Kind von mir wächst mir übers Kopf!”_^42 Wendelin was a merchant, an innkeeper. He worked less manually, naturally, than
that required by farmers but still had little use of education. With Anna, however, he succeeded, and Anna was not allowed to
continue her education. The time was not yet quite right for women to be equally educated.
The book presented to Joseph was chocked full with extraordinary, high-quality, colored photographs of the day and lessons
on the latest improvements of every type of faming imaginable, from raising cattle to raising bees. By the beginning of the 20th
century there was no subject that had not been explored. Germany stood at the pinnacle of every aspect of modern industrial
inventions and at the forefront of new ideas and thoughts. For example, consideration was given to initiating free university
scholarships in such fields as chemistry and engineering. Such new concepts supplied the needs of German industries with a
continuous supply of intellect necessary for developing new and better ways of doing things and keeping Germany as a world leader
in manufacturing.
Joseph did not inherit much appreciation for doing manual labor, for he quickly realized it was easier to work with one’s
mind. Still, he did not shirk from performing such duties as required on the farm. Becoming a farmer was not something he was
looking forward to doing with his life. He may have treasured the book given him by the school, for he kept it with him all his life,
but it appears that he took no lessons from it and made no penciled notations within its covers as he had in his other books that he
read and studied to master Spanish, Italian, and French, or study the principles of accounting and business English. Furthermore,
none of the basic elements of animal husbandry or agriculture were to be found adopted or put to use on the lands he would
eventually own in Texas.

Germany, in the half century before Joseph’s birth, had undergone some significant changes. By the time of Uncle Vincent’s visit,
Joseph had completed his duties in the Kaiser’s reserves and was now enjoying participating in Germany’s rise and prosperity that
was not unnoticed by smart young men coming of age in Germany during these years. Their prospects looked very bright as the new
century dawned. Remaining in a small hamlet like Volkertshausen was not what Joseph, someone who was bright and ambitious, saw
as an opportunity to advance himself.
The agricultural sector throughout Germany had also demonstrated a huge transitional accomplishment. With hardly any
increase in manpower, some branches managed to double or even triple their productivity simply because basically rural areas, like
that of Volkertshausen, had released their labor surpluses and accommodated the rules of a market economy.^43 After years of study
and fulfilling his military obligation to Kaiser Wilhelm II’s reserves, Joseph enjoyed his new start in life at the lakeside town of
Langenargen.^44 Germany was now taken as an example for successfully completing a rapid industrialization and the overall
transformation of its society. Imperial Germany at the turn of the century was not moving towards an internally generated
catastrophe as so many experts had predicted or hoped but was creating a society with as good a chance of achieving full economic
maturity, social modernization, and political democratization as any other at the time.^45 Joseph was now basically free for the first
time in his life.

```
46
The only family photograph made of Wendelin’s family, ca 1909-1910 outside the Gasthaus
zum Löwen. From left Joseph 21, Ernst 8, Wendelin 51, Maria 47, and Anna 14.
```

For more than a decade, Maria did all she could to keep peace between Joseph and Wendelin. By 1906 it had become clear
that Joseph was going to continue his schooling no matter what his father thought. Joseph often told an after-dinner tale of leaving
home during the middle of night determined to further his education. His mother packed a set of family place settings^47 to take along
and slipped him a couple of gold coins. Imagine the consequences the following morning when Wendelin discovered his son gone.
How much of Maria’s complicity did she reveal and what did she suffer for her part in the escape? Or did Wendelin really care that
he was gone?
Now, finished with his _Gymnasium_ years, Joseph demanded more. Joseph enrolled at the University of Tübingen in 1907 and
graduated from a commercial college at Kirchheim unter Tech in 1909, certified as a bookkeeper. He now returned to
Volkertshausen to announce his willingness to let bygones be bygones if his father would accept him as a partner in his businesses.
Now, it was Wendelin’s turn to call the shots. One last offer to join his father in his business was rebuffed. There had to be some
reason for that, and it may have stemmed from the fact that Wendelin did not want his son to know what he was doing or that
because of their estranged relationship, he had simply washed his hands of his oldest son. Perhaps that Wendelin just wished for his
oldest son to stay away. The years of animosity between them may have been simply too severe to dismiss so readily. Joseph had
long ago taken his mother’s side against his father just too many times for Wendelin to reconcile.
Anna Maria was witness to much of the conflict occurring between Joseph and her father. Ernst was still too young to
realize the problems between them. Certainly, they remained very quiet during outbreaks, but neither Anna or Ernst developed any
relationship with their father either. Anna was 9 years younger than Joseph. She was only 3 when Joseph left to attend the
_Gynamisum_ in Radolfzell am Rhein. Additionally, Anna’s role was defined by traditions from which females could not yet escape in
the Hegau at this time. Anna was bright and ambitious. She clearly enjoyed learning as well. How much it angered Wendelin is not
known. Anna wanted more than anything else to become a teacher. That thought was revolutionary and unfortunately, she did not
get that opportunity, not because she was female, but because of events that were beyond her control. Joseph had left at an early age.
He did not return home for reasons explained above. She was closest to Ernst, her younger brother, only 3 years younger than she.
Ernst’s relationship with his older brother was also strained from birth. Joseph had had far too many years growing up with
other boys his age to be tolerant of a little brother. Ernst was teased unmercifully by Joseph, seemingly at every opportunity. There
was no joy for Ernst in anticipation of Joseph arriving home for a weekend, for it meant he would be the subject of more teasing.
Ernst grew up with his own friends and excelled at Volkertshausen’s Turnverein.^48 That he was good at something that Joseph was
not may have annoyed Joseph. Also, it is very likely that Joseph would find himself unable to acknowledge that Ernst was good at
anything. It would be a trait that followed Joseph all his life. Much later, he would be unable to congratulate even his own daughter
for having achieved becoming the salutatorian of her graduating class.^49
What Wendelin did for the first twenty years of his marriage is not known for certain. He dabbled in selling many of those
new, labor-saving inventions being produced as a result of advances in the new modern German technology and now ever
increasingly available in smaller villages such as Volkertshausen. Farmers in the Hegau were experiencing a higher standard of living
than ever thought possible. The Hegau was rapidly changing as the growth of German industrialization was bringing wealth to even
the most remote and rural portions of her countryside. Whether Wendelin was a good merchant and was making a profit or draining
what family wealth he had inherited is simply not known. He did have a variety of business interests. He imported wines and sold
sewing machines as well as farm machinery, much of which were the latest revolutionary inventions being introduced throughout
Germany
Around 1909 Wendelin purchased a building located only a block from his home and opened an inn named the _Gasthaus
zum Löwen_.^50 There he installed Maria, burdened with rearing the last of her two youngest children, to cook and clean rooms in
addition to doing all the chores on his farm. Wendelin would now play the role of an innkeeper, which meant drinking wine and beer
with his few friends. In time Maria brought some respectability to his tarnished image, for she had turned out to be a good asset for
him. Now she worked even harder as he played the role of a squire.
The _Gasthaus zum Löwen_ served as an inn, perhaps a café of sorts. It was definitely a place to have stein of beer or a glass of
wine after a hard day’s work in the fields. One could have a hot or cold meal followed by a good hand-rolled cigar on Sunday
afternoons and even enjoy a good game of bowling. The inn had an alley attached! It also had a large ballroom and stage, the scene
of many dances. The local Volkertshausen musicians performed there regularly. They also practiced there and Wendelin sold them
beer as evidenced by the periodic statements he sent them. It may have been a popular place for villagers despite Wendelin’s
reputation, but it was not the only inn in the village. He had competition, but in a village where almost every household was involved
in farming, it is difficult to surmise that many locals frequented any inn. Wendelin provided food and watered-down wine^51 to those
who did come and spent countless hours engaged in talk with guests, but they were very likely guests who were only passing through.
As Wendelin played the host, Marie worked. Anna helped, of course, as she grew older.
Once established as an innkeeper, Wendelin thought nothing of continuing to diluting his cheap imported French and
Spanish wines with the fresh spring waters from the River Aach^52 to sell in his inn. The Aach’s source is a large spring with very cold
waters. Along its bank Wendelin dug a large cellar in which he stored his imported wines. There the cold, spring waters kept the
wines he bought cool until he tapped the barrels to dilute the wine. As an inhabitant of Volkertshausen, he had done quite well. He
was making good money and perhaps enjoying some status in the village even if he was earning no real deep respect from the
community. Then in 1910 Wendelin received a letter from America that changed everything for some members of his family.


Chapter I Notes

(^1) **The Black Forest** region ('Schwarzwald') is essentially known for three distinctive features: its highlands, scenery and woods, the
typical _Black Forest Gateau_ ('Schwarzwälder Kirschtorte') made with tasty cherry schnapps, and the traditional cuckoo-clock. The name
black forest was quite accurate in earlier times, when the forest was impenetrable though profitable; wood, silver, and ore were the
foundations of the Black Forest's inhabitants comparable wealth. When the wood trade began to falter, clock making stepped in and
has been a successful industry for the Black Forest ever since the 17th century. Another famous feature of the Black Forest region are
the traditional hat with its enormous pompoms called 'Bollenhut'. This hat is particularly distinctive among Germany's traditional
costumes. The hat is famous all over the world even though it was originally worn in only three parishes of the Black Forest region
and on special occasions only. The Black Forest region is blessed with a particularly rich mythological landscape. It is said to be
haunted by werewolves, sorcerers, witches, and the devil in differing guises. Helpful dwarves try to balance the scales.

- [http://www.about-germany.org/regions/blackforest.php](http://www.about-germany.org/regions/blackforest.php) - accessed 27 April 2010.

(^2) The Volkertshausen Coat of Arms. - [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Wappen_Volkertshausen.png](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Wappen_Volkertshausen.png) – accessed
December 8, 2008.
(^3) **Lake Constance** , called Bodensee in German, was named after Bodman, an 8th-century Carolingian palatinate, and is a 337 square
mile basin between the Alps and the Jura mountains. Three countries share the lake: Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. A total of
236 rivers and streams feed into the lake. The Rhine is the main source of water.

- [http://www.germany-tourism.de/ENG/destination_germany/master_tlregion-id102.htm](http://www.germany-tourism.de/ENG/destination_germany/master_tlregion-id102.htm) - accessed April 27, 2010.

(^4) **Volkertshausen** - [http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volkertshausen](http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volkertshausen) - accessed December 9, 2008.
(^5) Joss, Dieter, A Brief Description of a Typical Southern German Village in the Past Centuries, - Hereafter referred to as Joss –
Typical Southern German.
Village.http://images.google.com/imgres?imgurl=http://www.geisheimer.net/images/german/germ5.gif&imgrefurl - accessed June
16, 2009 – Hereafter referred to as Joss – Typical Southern German Village.
(^6) Joss – A Typical Southern German Village.
(^7) Ibid.
(^8) Bill McDonald, – Hereafter referred to as – McDonald – Wieser Family.
[http://www.mcwieser.info/wieserfamilyarti/index.html](http://www.mcwieser.info/wieserfamilyarti/index.html) - accessed June 15, 2009.
(^9) **Primogeniture during the mid-1850s.** These laws restricted who could be bequeathed land in a person's will. Through
primogeniture, only the eldest son could inherit the family land upon the death of his father (women were not allowed to control
property). The entail laws then made it illegal for this son to divide his newly acquired property, thus preventing younger siblings
from being willed land or being given land by their elder brother. Because land was becoming scare and quite expensive, many
siblings saw moving to America as the answer to their need and desire for land. German Immigration -
[http://www.mnsu.edu/emuseum/history/mnstatehistory/german_migration.html](http://www.mnsu.edu/emuseum/history/mnstatehistory/german_migration.html) - accessed June 16, 2009.
(^10) German Immigration - [http://www.mnsu.edu/emuseum/history/mnstatehistory/german_migration.html](http://www.mnsu.edu/emuseum/history/mnstatehistory/german_migration.html) - accessed June 16,
2009.
(^11) McDonald – Wieser Family.
(^12) Joss – A Typical Southern German Village
(^13) Because millers used stone to grind flour and other grains, some of the stone wore off in any grinding, mixing pieces of stone with
the grain. This caused the flour to have a gritty texture and probably was the cause of peasants accusing the miller of adding sand to
it. In reality, those eating such flour often caused excessive wear on their teeth and so it became a major health issue.
(^14) Ibid.
(^15) One florin equaled about $0.4825 USD between 1858 and 1892 in Habsburg, Austria. – Gold and Silver Standards -
[http://www.cyberussr.com/hcunn/gold-std.html#germany](http://www.cyberussr.com/hcunn/gold-std.html#germany) – accessed October 1, 2010.
(^16) Joss – A Typical Southern German Village
(^17) Ibid.
(^18) **Stambuch** – The book of families kept by the village priest noting marriages, births, and deaths if they stayed in the village and left
blank for those who moved. Occasionally, a notation was made to the effect that they had immigrated to America.
(^19) Gone to America
(^20) Stapleton, F. G., The Unpredictable Dynamo: Germany’s Economy, 1879-1918. History Review, 2002 -
[http://www.questia.com/googleScholar.qst;jsessionid=JzmhSzpDL3GbNFQcpvmnsTm5xhyyNP0pJLppJqRf51gSnwL0TQ3d!-](http://www.questia.com/googleScholar.qst;jsessionid=JzmhSzpDL3GbNFQcpvmnsTm5xhyyNP0pJLppJqRf51gSnwL0TQ3d!-)
753560195?docId=5000657368 – accessed January 18, 2009.
(^21) Miletic, Aleksander R., Migration and Inequality in Germany 1870 – 1913 - New York: Oxford University Press Inc.,
2006http://www.ece.ceu.hu/?q=node/126 - accessed January 18, 2009. – Hereafter quoted as Miletic – Migration.
(^22) Ibid.
(^23) It was the same fear of the unknown that was sweeping the United States as reports are predicting that China was on the verge of
surpassing the United States’ economy by 2016.
(^24) Miletic – Migration.
(^25) Ibid.
(^26) Volkertshausen maintained a poorhouse for those who found themselves down on their luck. Everyone was expected to work.
Farmers and merchants paid such tenants with food; rather than in currency or coin. When Vincent sold his home and business,
Maria faced going to the poorhouse as an option. Anna, her daughter, took her to the Gehrihof rather than face the embarrassment.


(^27) In order to get a feeling for wealth and poverty, here are some figures from ca. 1800: a good horse cost about 100 Florin (fl.), a bull
about 40 fl., and an old cow 15 fl. The daily (12-hour day) wage for a "Tageloehner" was six Kreuzer, that is, one tenth of an fl. It
took 10 days of work to earn one Florin* or almost three years to buy a horse. In Southern Germany, the Florin was the Gulden
between 1754-1873. - [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Florin](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Florin) - [http://www.geisheimer.net/info/germ/village.htm](http://www.geisheimer.net/info/germ/village.htm) - accessed June 20,
2009.
(^28) The farm is still occupied by a Buhl and consequently still referred to as Buhlhof, which simply means Buhl’s farm.
(^29) **The Black Death** had reached Italy by the winter of 1347 and moved up along the Rhine trade routes, including Lake Constance
early the next year. The year 1348 proved to be one the worst years for the plague. Because it followed trade routes and
concentrated in cities, it did not mean that smaller villages such as Volkertshausen or Emmingen am Eck, or even the Buhlhof
escaped. The Black Death: Arrival in the West by E. L. Skip Knox, Boise State University -
[http://www.boisestate.edu/courses/westciv/plague/04.shtml](http://www.boisestate.edu/courses/westciv/plague/04.shtml) - accessed May 8, 2010.
(^30) Photograph taken by M. Wieser, August 2011.
(^31) **A Hector** is approximately 2 ½ acres.
(^32) Photograph taken in the 1950s. In the collection of Lieselotte Ehrensperger, Tuttlingen, Germany.
(^33) Lieselotte to M. Wieser – Tuttlingen, 2009.
(^34) **Schweizerstumpen** are so-called Swiss stump cigars. These are cigars that have been cut off bluntly at both ends and made from
tobacco imported from North and South America. As in Fredericksburg, there were a number of small cigar factories in the
Volkertshausen and Engen.
(^35) The dresser, standing closet, and one bed remain in the possession of Lieselotte Ehrensperger, a granddaughter living in Tuttlingen.
The other single bed was given to Mark and is in his possession in Fredericksburg, Texas. Incidentally, the bed is quite short as it was
the custom at that time to sleep propped up.
(^36) This account told to Mark Wieser during the summer of 1964 by Anna Haug and confirmed by Lieselotte Ehrensperger in October
2009.
(^37) **An Ohrfeige** is a slap to the face, but it can be delivered with much vengeance if the hand is cupped and slapped against an ear
causing the concussion to be delivered to the inner ear.
(^38) **Radolfzell am Bodensee** is located at the western end of Lake Constance, approximately 11 miles from Konstanz. It is the third
largest town, after Constance and Singen, in the district of Konstanz, in Baden-Württemberg. -
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radolfzell](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radolfzell) - accessed May 6, 2010. It is still quite common for children of one village to attend school
in nearby villages. Its primary focus was that of preparing youngsters for a role in agriculture, which explains why Joseph received a
book relating to Germany’s latest agricultural improvements. Radolfzell was too far from home for Joseph to commute daily.
(^39) **The German Gymnasium** is a state-maintained secondary school that prepares pupils for higher academic education and
attendance, continued normally until 19 or 20. Joseph apparently followed the mathematical curriculum that emphasized two modern
languages as he was able to speak Spanish, Italian, and a little French. -
[http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/250262/Gymnasium](http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/250262/Gymnasium) - accessed 8 May 8, 2010.
(^40) **Stockach** , A larger town in the vicinity of the village of Volkertshausen, the birthplace of Joseph. The Counts of Nellenburg
founded Stockach in the 13th century, the town receiving town privileges in 1283. In 1401 the Landgraviate of Nellenburg owned the
towns of Engen, Tengen, Radolfzell, Stockach, 125 villages, 9 abbeys, and 4 mailing stations. The Counts of Nellenburg became
extinct in 1422, and their estates were acquired by the House of Habsburg in 1465; hence, Stockach was a part of Austria until 1805.
In the Swabian War of 1499, the troops of the Three Leagues besieged the town but failed to capture it. In the course of the War of
the Spanish Succession, Elector Maximilian II Emanuel of Bavaria set fire to Stockach. During the French Revolutionary Wars of the
Second Coalition two battles were fought here between the French First Republic and the Habsburg Monarchy in 1799 and 1800. In
1810 Stockach finally fell to the Grand Duchy of Baden. - [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stockach](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stockach) - accessed June 19, 2009.
(^41) Inside cover page of book presented to Joseph Wieser, March 17, 1906. Shclipf’s Handbuch der Landwirtschaft, Berlin. The book
on German agriculture is now in the possession of Joby Benedict Wieser, the grandson of J.B.
(^42) **“Kein Kind von mir wächst mir übers Kopf!”** – No child of mine is going to become smarter than me.
(^43) Miletic - Migration
(^44) **Langenargen** is a small city on the eastern shore of Lake Constance, popular with German vacationers. Here Joseph secured
employment at the firm of Bass and Keller, a manufacture of vinegars.
(^45) Miletic - Migration.
(^46) Postcard taken ca 1910, perhaps at the time of the visit by Uncle Vincent from America.
(^47) Maria gave her son a set of service pieces consisting of a knife, fork, and spoon with which Joseph would eat every meal until his
death. These are in the possession of M. Wieser – Fredericksburg, Texas.
(^48) **Turnvereins** originated in Prussia which emphasized gymnastic exercises but was also an important social and patriotic function. -
[http://www.ohio.edu/chastain/rz/turnvere.htm](http://www.ohio.edu/chastain/rz/turnvere.htm) - accessed July 25, 2011.
(^49) Imogene finished second in her class and was awarded the honor of salutatorian. Joseph admonished her for not having studied
harder and finishing first.
(^50) The name of the inn may have been that of a kind of franchise for a brand of a particular beer for which breweries furnished beer
coasters and other advertising supplies. There were tens, if not hundreds, of inns with this name scattered throughout Germany and
Austria.
(^51) J.B. would often tell that his father imported wines from France and Spain and stored them in a cool cellar near the banks of the
river Aach where he added water to the wines to double his volume.


(^52) The River Aach’s source is an abundant spring at around 2,500 gallons per second. It flows from the headwaters of the Danube as
it disappears in a huge sinkhole and finally into Lake Constance at Radolfzell. [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radolfzeller_Aach](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radolfzeller_Aach) -
accessed July 25, 2011.

