## Family Introduction (main subjects)



### Vincent Farber Wieser – 1837-1915

Vincent was born in Volkertshausen, Baden, and immigrated in 1851 as a young boy with his family to the United States, settling in Iowa where the family farmed. There Vincent married and built his first mill but moved his entire family of nine children to Texas in 1891, where they began to acquire a number of mills in the Central Texas area. In partnership with his sons, they became millionaires and in 1910, Vincent feeling that his years were numbered, made a pilgrimage back to the little village of his birth. It was the triumphant return of an immigrant who had truly found American streets paved in gold.[^1] There he met his first cousin, Wendelin, whom he had never met, and among Wendelin’s children, Joseph. Vincent very likely spoke highly of the probability of the chances of success in America and encouraged Joseph, who was already employed as an accountant with a firm on the shores of Lake Constance, to consider working for him in Texas. When Joseph finally arrived in Texas four years later, Vincent took him under his wing. Vincent paid for his passage and in the following months helped Joseph enroll in a trade school. He even loaned him money when he needed it, but Vincent died the following year in 1915, leaving Joseph alone among his American cousins.

 

### Wendelin Wieser – 1858-1928

Wendelin was also born in Volkertshausen, Baden, the only son of his parents’ four children.

Wendelin, spoiled by doting sisters, detested farm work and eventually engaged in buying and selling wine, farming machinery, and new home appliances, many of which were the state of the art and becoming available even to the most rural areas of Germany. As a youth he enjoyed debauchery to such an extent that no reputable girl in the village would have him for a husband. Unmarried and at the age of thirty, he turned to the aid of a matchmaker and was introduced to Maria Buhl, herself being promoted for marriage by her brothers.[^2]  They married in 1888, four months before the birth of Joseph (J.B.) and moved into Wendelin’s house in Volkertshausen.

In 1909 Wendelin purchased the Gasthaus zum Löwen  and began operating an inn, a more respectable trade. Their marriage was not a happy one. His oldest son Joseph grew to detest his father. Wendelin was later accused by Maria of causing their oldest daughter’s death through his neglect. Because of their differences, he refused offers by Joseph to join him in business. In 1912 he suddenly and without warning, sold his home, the Gasthaus zum Löwen , and what farm lands he had in Volkertshausen and converted everything to cash. With the help of Wendelin’s sisters, Maria and her two remaining children were prevented from removing even their personal things from their former home. With his mistresses in tow, he moved to Switzerland, where after enjoying a few years of retirement, hyperinflation wiped out the value of his paper currency after the war. Unable to keep his mistresses in the style to which they had grown accustomed, she and others left him. Alone again and homeless, he begged Maria for forgiveness. Joseph grew angry at his mother’s thoughts of taking him back. Consequently, he was unsuccessful in reentering their lives. He died in 1928, alone, and after his city’s request for burial expenses was rejected by Maria and Anna, he was buried in a pauper’s cemetery in Jestetten, a tiny village southwest of Schaffhausen along the Rhein River. As all graves in Germany, tombstones, if any, are removed after 15-20 years. The exact location of his final resting place remains unknown.

### Maria Buhl, 1862-1938

Maria was born on the Buhlhof, the family farm near Engen in the Hegau region. At the age of 26 and already five months pregnant, she was married to Wendelin Wieser through the efforts of her brothers. She gave Wendelin five children, two of whom died before reaching maturity. The oldest, Joseph, was the love of her life and to whom she looked for advice, but she also often ignored his suggestions as she did not have the confidence to do what he advised. In Volkertshausen she managed Vincent’s small farm and later the Gastehaus zum Löwen. She was constantly humiliated by Wendelin and often forced to wait on the mistresses Wendelin brought into the inn. When he sold their home out from under her, she fled with only the clothes on her back to her sister’s farm, the Gehrihof, for a temporary respite. Physically unable to work, Maria suffered years of severe depression and wailed alone in her room in deep despair. Anna, her 15-year-old daughter, brought her to Tuttlingen where she sought employment cleaning houses. She also found a place for them to live. Anna became her sole support and would continue to support her for the rest of her life. After Anna’s marriage, Maria helped with housework and cared of her grandchildren, Lieselotte and Ernst. She died in 1938.

### Joseph Benedikt (J.B.) Wieser, 1888-1960 

Joseph was born in Volkertshausen, Baden, the oldest son of Wendelin Wieser and Maria Buhl. An outstanding, bright student, he loved to read and was recognized for his outstanding achievements upon completing his studies at Radolfzell, a nearby town where he had been sent to school. He continued his education at Kirchheim under Tech and the University of Tübingen. He completed his basics, and served for two years in the Kaiser’s Bavarian reserves. Following his basic training he was employed as a bookkeeper at Keller und Bass in Langenargen on Lake Constance by 1908 and at Hirsch & Lichter in Stuttgart early in 1912. He came home during Vincent’s return and they began corresponding, but for four years he resisted Vincent’s offer of employment in Texas. After losing the friendship of a girl in whom J.B. was quite interested, he immigrated to the United States in 1914 and arrived a month before the outbreak of the Great War in Europe. Unable to obtain a good position at Vincent’s mills because he spoke no English, he returned to his studies, taking courses in English and advanced bookkeeping in San Antonio, Texas. Completing his year of study, he finally secured employment at one of his cousin’s mills in Dublin as an accountant but was transferred to Hamilton a few months later. There he also studied law with an attorney and earned a Bachelors of Law through correspondence from LaSalle University within months. He was admitted to the Texas Bar in 1917 even before becoming a naturalized citizen. He opened his own law office in Hamilton that same month, but at the end of summer, he moved his law practice to Fredericksburg following threatening rumors being circulated against Germans in that area. In Fredericksburg he quickly founded Gillespie County Title and Realty Company, borrowed and lent money, and began speculating in oil leases, and became 14  known simply as “J.B.” Establishing a reputation for honesty and vision, he stood for office but was defeated for county attorney in 1922 and again in 1926. He married the former Estella Emily Hahn in 1923 and brought her to live in the small bungalow he had built on his 100-acre farm he had purchased on Goehmann Lane. Together they reared five children. In 1930 he was finally elected county attorney and re-elected in 1932. In 1934 he was elected county judge but was defeated for re-election in 1936 in a bitter defeat. Seeking higher elective office in 1938, he lost in a very close election for state representative and again in 1940. He made one more unsuccessful run for county judge in 1948, but had vowed to withdraw from all civic involvement in 1940. In 1950 he was joined in his practice by his son Jarvis, and together they operated a successful law practice and abstract company until his death in 1960.

### Anna Wieser Haug, 1897-1971

Anna was born in Volkertshausen, Baden, the only surviving girl born to Wendelin Wieser and Maria Buhl. She loved school but was denied becoming a school teacher by her father. When Wendelin sold everything out from out from under her mother and brother, she convinced her mother that she needed to find work in Tuttlingen. There she rented an attic living space, found work, and enrolled her brother in school. She became the breadwinner, for her mother was henceforth unable to work. She doted on her brother Ernst and saw that he was able to stay in school. With some reservations she nevertheless urged his immigration to the new world to join his brother. She became the main letter writer between J.B. and Ernst. She married Wilhelm Haug in 1921 while J.B. was in Europe on business. She and Wilhelm reared two children. She continued to be the main breadwinner for the family as her mother cooked and cared for her family and as William’s health failed him. She endured a difficult life through two world wars. The postwar years saw her children married, and many grandchildren (8) came into her life. William died quite young in the 1950s, and she eventually retired to an active life traveling, singing, and enjoying her grandchildren. She finally visited America in 1966 and died in 1971 after a short illness.

### Ernst Gottfried Wieser, 1900-1983 

Ernst was born in Volkertshausen, Baden, the last of five children born to Wendelin Wieser and Maria Buhl. Ernst grew up not knowing much about his older brother for Joseph was away at school much of the time. At the age of 12, he followed his mother and sister to Tuttlingen when his parents’ marriage failed. There he finished school and undertook training as a machinist in Tuttlingen’s Asquelar factory. Drafted near the close of the Great War, he served briefly in the Kaiser’s Army until an armistice was agreed to and participated to a degree in the socialist and communists revolutions that swept Germany after the collapse of the Armistice. Ernst loved having and drinking with friends. At the constant request of J.B., Ernst decided to immigrate by agreeing to serve in Mexico’s revolutionary redistribution of farms in exchange for passage. After two years he was permitted entry into the United States and lived with J.B. and his new bride for about at year before returning to Mexico City in 1924.

There he trained as a maker of porcelain. In late 1928 he immigrated directly to New York City from Vera Cruz and unsuccessfully sought for a decade to find employment opportunities in factories as a machinist. Coddled by a gallery of women, including the sister of Anna’s husband and her daughter in America, he drifted from one job to another. Unable to find suitable employment he blamed much of his and America’s problems on the Jews. He often arose early to listen to speeches being broadcast via short wave radio to America. He constantly wished to return to Germany, but his delays and indecisions finally became unattainable when the United States entered the Second World War. An inventor of sorts he tried for years to invent the one thing that might make his stay in America worthwhile. During World War II, however, he finally found employment suited to his skills. He worked for defense contractors machining periscopes for American submarines and also worked on the top-secret Norden Bombsight for the Army Air Corps. The postwar years, found him working with projection and recording equipment and through his skills alone installed the first motion picture projectors aboard Howard Hughes’ TWA airliners in 1961. He also installed more than 700 projectors and tape recorders for the Seattle and New York World Fairs in the early 1960s. His mysterious marriage in 1940 to the former Elizabeth Eckert proved to be an unhappy and a loveless arrangement from which he was unable to escape because New York State had no provision for recognizing a divorce. They reared two children, both of whom were apparently turned against him by his wife. He spent much of his last days at his bungalow in New Jersey until he forced to return to care for his ailing wife whose last illness, as it turned out, required care around the clock. Ernst died in 1983, however, less than two weeks after J.B.’s wife Estella. (Stella)

### Estella Emily Hahn – 1901-1983

Estella was born in Fredericksburg and was reared without knowing her real father, for he, Wilhelm Wilke, was murdered in a Main Street saloon some eight months before her birth. Her mother later married Otto Zimmermann in 1909. Stella was forced to drop out of school to pick cotton and help her mother in running her boarding house.

She worked for a while as a legal secretary for H. H. Sagebiel, but became a bookkeeper for Collins Wholesale Grocery where she remained employed well into the 1920s. She met Joseph upon his arrival at her mother’s boarding house in August 1917, and they became friends. Because of her ability to save money she readily loaned J.B. money for his investments. In 1920 her oldest sister at 25 and best friend committed suicide for fear of not finding a suitable mate. Her death prompted Stella to demand that J.B. either marry her or she would begin to look elsewhere for a husband for she did not wish to lead a life of the work that a boarding house requires. Estella, as all women at that time, prepared all her family’s meals, did all the housework, and scrimped and saved where possible in order to make do with less. She became an excellent cook like her mother. An excellent card player for she had an excellent understanding of numbers, she enjoyed playing cards as her one luxury she permitted herself every other week. Invariably she won 1st  place for high score in those bi-weekly sessions. Nevertheless, after her day’s work was done, she was expected to play cards with J.B. until time for bed. They reared five children and through her help in managing frugally, they were able to send all their children to college. After J.B.’s death, she began to travel and enjoy an easier life. Estella possessed a sharp mind for numbers from having done the books for Collins. It please her when her youngest son purchased the old Collins Warehouse in which she had worked in the 1920s and had it moved to the small family farm on the San Antonio highway. There she spent many afternoons 15 selling peaches and her jams and jellies to customers at the fruit stand now he called das Peach Haus. It must have brought her some joy knowing that J.B. had established the Fredericksburg peach industry and that so many others were enjoying her jams and jellies. She always enjoyed reading and thereby secured a better education than most college graduates and was certainly better versed than many of her friends. While planning another trip, she died as suddenly as J.B., in 1983 after a brief illness. It was discovered that she had contracted pancreatic cancer. She had a lifelong fear of being buried alive. Consequently, she was cremated and her ashes reside in her headstone at Greenwood Cemetery alongside the grave of J.B.

Footnotes

[^1]: Vincent had apparently written to the Burgermeister of Volkertshausen announcing his arrival. Lieselotte recalls her mother’s excitement and anticipation of 
    receiving a gift from their rich American cousin only to find disappointingly that he brought each of them only an ordinary catholic rosary.

[^2]:  Unmarried girls were unwanted even as extra hands on German farms. The farm or Hof was given to the oldest son. 
    Second sons and all girls were expected to leave the farms. Maria’s brothers did not want her on the Buhlhof and ironically hired the same person Wendelin had hired to find him a bride. The introduction went poorly. Both brothers vanished from the farm one day leaving Maria there by herself. Wendelin appeared in their absence. Ashamed and alone, Maria found herself pregnant and in the following months even more unwelcomed than before.

